AI #1803: Contract Commitment dataset extension (#1924)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: specification/datasets/contract_commitment/columns/contractcommitmentduration.md

Author: Would it be better to create a new attribute for Expected Format?  Or should we just keep it here for now?  I expect this would be useful in the future, but I don't want to over-engineer this solution.

Particularly interested in what you think, @ijurica and @mike-finopsorg.

Author: Upon reflection, my current vote is to leave it as-is, and build out a new attribute if it becomes a repeating pattern with other new columns.  I will close this comment on Feb 10 if I do not receive any feedback on this topic.

# Contract Commitment Duration

Contract Commitment Duration represents the total calendar length of a [*contract commitment*](#glossary:contract-commitment), from [start date](#datasets.contractcommitment.datestart) to [end date](#datasets.contractcommitment.contractcommitmentdateend).

The value follows a structured format of [Numeric Value] [Unit], representing the full lifespan of the agreement; see below for more information.

## Expected Format

"[Numeric Value] [Unit]"
* [Numeric Value]: A positive integer.
* [Unit]: A standardized unit of time, singular or plural (e.g., Hour, Year, Years).

## Requirements

ContractCommitmentDuration adheres to the following requirements:

* ContractCommitmentDuration MUST be of type String.
* ContractCommitmentDuration MUST conform to [StringHandling](#attributes.stringhandling) requirements.
* ContractCommitmentDuration MUST NOT be null.

> * ContractCommitmentDuration MUST adhere to the expected format of "[Numeric Value] [Unit]", where [Numeric Value] is a positive integer, and [Unit] is a standardized unit of time, either singular or plural (e.g., Hour, Year, Years).

Reviewer: I think we should write this more like the normative text used in UnitFormat

e.g. 
```
Units MAY be expressed with a unit quantity or time interval. If a unit quantity or time interval
is used, the unit quantity or time interval MUST be expressed as a whole number. The following
formats are valid:
<quantity> <plural-units> -
"1000 Tokens"
,
"1000 Characters"
<plural-units>/<interval> <plural-time-units> -
"Units/3 Months"
```

```suggestion
* ContractCommitmentDuration MUST be expressed with a quantity and time unit, where quantity is a positive integer, and time-unit is a standardized unit of time, either singular or plural (e.g., Hour, Year, Years). . The following
formats are valid:
  * <quantity> <singular-time-unit> - "1 Day", "1 Year"
  * <quantity> <plural-time-units> - "3 Months", "3 Years"
```

Author: Okay, heard.  Here is a slight cleanup.  Is it okay that it's two sentences?  Or should we break them into two?

```suggestion
* ContractCommitmentDuration MUST be expressed with a quantity and time unit, where quantity is a positive integer, and time-unit is a standardized unit of time, either singular or plural (e.g., Hour, Year, Years). The following formats are valid:
  * <quantity> <singular-time-unit> - "1 Day", "1 Year"
  * <quantity> <plural-time-units> - "3 Months", "3 Years"
```

* ContractCommitmentDuration SHOULD present the unit of time as one of the allowed values.
* ContractCommitmentDuration MUST be calculated as the time elapsed between ContractCommitmentPeriodStart and ContractCommitmentPeriodEnd.

> * ContractCommitmentDuration SHOULD present the largest relevant unit of time (e.g., "1 Year" instead of "12 Months").

Reviewer: Whats not clear here is, do I use 1.16 Years over 14 Months?

Maybe its 

```suggestion
* ContractCommitmentDuration SHOULD present the duration using the largest whole, time unit that represents the contract term without fractional values (e.g., “1 Year” instead of “12 Months”).
```

Author: Heard.  Here's a rephrase of your suggestion.  What do you think?  Also, should we use `time unit` or `time-unit`?  Your suggestion in a previous comment was `time-unit`, but here it is `time unit`.

```suggestion
* ContractCommitmentDuration SHOULD represent the contract term using the largest non-fractional time unit (e.g., “1 Year” instead of “12 Months”; "14 Months" instead of "1.16 Years").
```

## Column ID

ContractCommitmentDuration

## Display Name

Contract Commitment Duration

## Description

Represents the total calendar length of a [*contract commitment*](#glossary:contract-commitment).

## Content Constraints

| Constraint      | Value          |
| :-------------- | :------------- |
| Dataset         | [Contract Commitment](#datasets.contractcommitment)  |
| Column type     | Dimension      |
| Feature level   | Mandatory      |
| Allows nulls    | False          |
| Data type       | String         |
| Value format    | Expected format |

Allowed values:

The following units (either singular or plural) should be used for the representation of time:

| Duration Unit |
| :--- |

> | Minute(s) |

Reviewer: Im split between a short list and one that is more programatic. i.e. should we use Minute(s) or just have
Minute
Minutes

Author: Happy to do whatever will make the most sense from the perspective of the Requirements Model.  Tell me what is simpler to handle downstream, and let's go with that.

Reviewer: I think its more programatic to have the unique cases in the list, so if we are happy with the list being a little longer its clearer to me.

Author: Done!  Committed separately.  Resolving.

> # Contract Commitment Duration

Reviewer 2: What is the purpose of this column? I know that it says its purpose is but I see a confusion on the horizon. I think this is missing the use case of identification of the classification of duration unintentionally. If I buy a 3 year convertible reservation in year 1 and then exchange it for another server, the resulting new reservation may or may not have the same end time, it will not have the same start time. Yet, its classification is still a 3 year reservation. 

That asside, durations in non full time delta format units are more problematic to use for real automation. For example if the start is 1/16/2026 01:25:25 and the end time is  1/15/2026 01:00:00 and the duration are we expecting the full delta in only minute precision? Start time and end time is sufficient without a duration. 

Also what is the intended behavior of the duration on early termination?

I would suggest that this columns is used for classification rather than explicit duration.

Reviewer 2: Getting my thoughts down here...going to take a crack at an alternative.

Author: @rileyjenk 
You have a very fair point, and it aligns with my experience as a vendor.  It should describe the _nature_ of the duration, rather than precisely describe the duration itself, which could drift for the reasons you describe.  Further, imagine this:

* Scenario: A commitment starts at 00:00:00 and ends at 23:59:59 one year later.
* Calculation: The delta is 1 second short of 1 year.
* The Rule: You cannot say "1 Year" because it's fractional (0.999 years). You can't say "12 Months". You might be forced to represent this as "364 Days" or "8759 Hours".

...And that would suck.

How would you feel if I changed the name of the column to `ContractCommitmentDurationCategory` and made clear that this is a classification of the Contract Commitment, rather than trying to precisely describe the delta between start and end?  A Duration Category of "3 Year" would remain for its lifespan, regardless of whether it's converted.

I'm also open to `ContractCommitmentDurationType` -- though we're being specific enough about what's allowed here that I feel we could consider it "normalized", and thus `Category` is warranted.

Author: @rileyjenk 
I ended up going with `ContractCommitmentDurationType`.  I am resolving this comment; please reopen if you still have concerns!
